existence
reality exists
this is a parsimonious way of saying
reality is
known to exist or even i know reality
exists
that there exists a world external to
anyone's thoughts on the matter
should not be a strikingly profound
claim to make
and yet generations of philosophers have
allowed the misconception to leak into
academia
down into the schooling system so that
now we have people
who have been educated into skepticism
not skepticism of the i don't think
ghosts are real
kind but skepticism of the ancient greek
kind the concern that we
cannot know and because we cannot know
perhaps almost anything goes including
that
nothing exists or that nothing really
truly exists if you like
but let us move beyond the relativists
who might claim that there is no
external reality
or at least that we cannot make
objective claims about
it and let us leave behind the
philosophical idealists
those who claim it's all in the mind
here we might even throw the
it's all a simulation idea into the same
bin
for there although there might be an
external reality
we cannot know it because we are trapped
like plato's cavemen
in a world that might bear no
resemblance to what we think about it
let us instead embrace realism the idea
that not only does an external reality
exist outside our minds
but that our minds are special kinds of
computers indeed
computers that explain the world around
us with increasing fidelity
minds the minds of people come to form
models
accurate working models in the words of
david deutsch of the rest of physical
reality
this is an astonishing fact about us in
one of his
ted talks david speaks about quasars
basically
black holes that are literally consuming
entire stars
and in the process creating huge
so-called accretion disks
white-hot rotating disks of electrically
charged matter spinning so fast
that intense magnetic fields are
generated that cause jets of material to
shoot outwards from the disk
making the quasar brighter than an
entire galaxy despite the fact
in terms of their physical volume
they're smaller than a solar system
the physics says david as such an object
is so
different from that of a human brain and
yet the latter is able to form an
accurate explanation
a predictive model and a physical
description of the former
this is astounding and it is this that
allows us to say
quasars exist but what is existence
what does it mean to exist a thing
exists
if it features unavoidably in our best
explanations
but not otherwise we know quasars exist
precisely because
we have an explanation of otherwise
problematic observations
if we did not have those observations
then we would not have a chain of
causation which
led both creatively and logically to
that object i just described
no explanation of the physical world out
there requires that
elves exist or magical wizards
but explanations of what happens in
tolkien's the lord of the rings do
the book the lord of the rings exists
and that book
being a work of fiction relies upon the
existence of elves and magical wizards
for its own
internal consistency those fictional
entities exist
within a fictional world but they do not
really exist
which is to say they did not exist
outside of fictional worlds
no explanation of our physical reality
requires us to postulate
wizards and elves so wizards and elves
do not exist
but now a philosophical quibble might
learn
let us consider gravity gravity exists
just like matter exists and space exists
but saying matter exists tells us very
little about its nature
is it continuously divisible or does it
terminate at a smallest possible
particle
what is matter what does it exist as
atoms sure but they are emergent they
are more complex arrangements of more
fundamental particles
protons neutrons and electrons and even
some of those are likewise emergent
more complex objects composed of simpler
ones but never mind matter
what about gravity gravity exists it is
that thing which we must invoke in our
explanations of say
tides or the motion of planets or indeed
the frustration of a dropped glass
smashing upon the floor rather than
hovering in mid-air
but what is gravity is it a force
does the force of gravity exist it used
to be thought there was a force of
gravity
the force explanation of gravity was a
way of understanding gravity
as being the attraction between objects
which had mass
on this view which is the view created
by isaac newton
and which survived for centuries the
force of attraction could be calculated
and thus many phenomena accurately
predicted
but how the force of gravity arose
exactly no one knew
they merely knew it was a force so they
were right to say at the time
when there was no viable alternative the
force of gravity exists
now if we understand them properly in
light of how we understand knowledge
today
we should understand that statement to
mean
we fallibly know that the force of
gravity exists
either that force exists or it does not
there is no middle ground
we have knowledge of it and we are
fallible our knowledge
everyone's knowledge at all times we
should expect is
filled with errors but it becomes
terribly cumbersome to preface
everything we say on such topics with we
fallibly know that
and so on so we can dispense with that
because it literally goes without saying
so we just say the force of gravity
exists
but we can always be wrong about that
and we should expect to be
and as it turns out that is indeed a
false claim
because now we know better there were
indeed problems
found with newton's theory there were
errors and those errors were corrected
an entirely new theory einstein's theory
of general relativity
was able to make more accurate
predictions than newtons could
and more than this it postulated the
existence of a whole slew
of other phenomena and even other
objects ultimately
that existed and part of this
explanation was that the so-called
force of gravity was found not to exist
so the force of gravity does not exist
gravity does
of course it does but its true nature
does not require us to invoke a force of
attraction
bodies with mass do not attract one
another they may appear to
but then water poured from a kettle into
a cup appears for all the world to flow
like a continuous fluid
rather than as discrete little particles
more resembling dry
sand being poured from a bucket we know
those molecules of h2o exist
even though we cannot see them our
ability to see them
moment to moment has no bearing on their
existence or otherwise
their existence is invoked because our
best theory tells us they exist
and that water as a continuous fluid
which is to say
fluid made of stuff which never
terminates at a smallest possible
particle
is false and in the same way our best
current theory decides between two
mutually exclusive claims gravity is a
force
versus gravity is not a force and
gravity is not a force that attraction
you think you feel is an illusion
much like the water is a continuous
fluid is an illusion
compelling sure but your senses deceive
you
if you are able to fall freely perhaps
you've been skydiving
you'll feel no attraction to the earth
sure if you open your eyes you will see
the ground rushing up to meet you
apparently
but close your eyes you will feel the
wind rush past
sure but that sensation is no clue about
anything attracting you
you will not feel a pull instead you
will
literally feel weightless if anything in
this non-ideal situation
you will feel pushed somewhat upwards
many more of us
have had this sensation to a much lesser
effect in certain kinds of fun park
rides
that give you a couple of seconds of
free fall before bringing you to a very
fast halt
in those moments i have never noticed
attraction to the earth
and i've looked for it i have felt in
truth attraction to
nothing at all and if anything a slight
force
upwards and that of course is the force
of air upon me resisting my motion
this force the supposed attraction a
pulling force
just is not there we know what a pull is
any friend can pull your
arm and you will notice what it is like
to accelerate towards them
but not in free fall you can be
disabused by the illusion of the
sensation of the force of gravity
by experiment itself what gravity
actually does
is distort space and time or better yet
the single space time around objects
this means that when objects move they
do not move through
a euclidean space of sharp angles along
idealized lines such as in high school
geometry textbooks
but does all of this mean that the force
of gravity simply winked out of
existence
the day einstein published his theory of
general relativity
of course it never did exist but were
the people prior to this date
right to say it existed yes they were
right to
say it existed but they were wrong
what else could they do they could not
possibly predict the content of future
theories
so we are right today to say the force
of gravity does not exist
but does it really not exist yes and if
you want to say more you can say
it does not exist according to our best
known explanation
but does it really really not exist yes
it really does not exist
according to our best explanation but
someone might say
but maybe it really really like
ultimately in the final analysis
there really is a force of gravity but
there can be
no final analysis it's just constant
progress and improvement
ah but then you don't really know if the
force of gravity exists
no i really know to really know
something means
to really know it and that means
according to our best theory and
fallibly at that and knowing that the
theory is going to contain errors
not yet found when someone wants the
really really true knowledge
they are appealing to a feeling of
certainty and finality
and infallibility they are demanding
a standard no human can ever reach aha
they say but doesn't this mean we can
never
really truly know anything no
no you're not quite getting this we
really truly know it
i know it but you have to give up the
notion that no
means have the final once and for all
completely perfect and error-free answer
ah yes so that's what i meant yes in the
final once and for all completely
perfect and error-free account of things
does the force of gravity exist look we
can't say aha
so you don't know after all yes
i know i really truly do but what you're
after is
not knowledge apparently you don't want
to say i know about gravity you want to
say
you're certain about it you want to be
an omniscient god or an oracle
you want to appeal to the supernatural
now there are many such things we could
have put into this category
flogistan the substance that made the
difference between that which was
flammable and that which was not
perhaps it exists perhaps it doesn't so
far as we know
it doesn't or ilen vitale the life force
that animated living things
or the luminiferous ether the substance
permeating all of space which vibrated
with the passage of light waves
and add light waves to this list too by
the way
at times we will be mistaken about what
exists
but all we can say about what exists is
what our best
theories say and nothing more nothing
less
but beyond our knowledge of course there
are more things than we know to exist
that will always be so and some of what
we think exists
will be mistaken it won't in truth exist
but this is no great mystery it is as i
like to say the distinction between that
somewhat antiquated way of thinking
about philosophy
the ontology of the world which is to
say what ultimately
reality consists of utterly independent
of people coming to explain it
and epistemology what we know about that
ultimate reality
we are beings of epistemology not
ontology
knowledge is by its nature conjectural
and so will contain errors
ontology on the other hand is the
flawless account of a perfect reality
so knowledge of ontology is something
like an imperfect perfect account
a silly and pointless notion that
reality exists
and we can come to some understanding of
it is quite enough
that our knowledge is by itself
imperfect and always at every moment
riddled with errors is a product of the
process that produces it
our minds our fallible minds and this is
a cause for hope and genuine excitement
for it means that we will have before us
a continuous stream of evidence which we
can interpret
allowing us to correct the errors in our
guesses about what the nature of reality
is
we can improve and make things ever
better if we choose to
we may err and falter indeed we will but
this is just to say
that we'll never get to a point beyond
which progress cannot be made
for if that were possible then hope
would indeed be lost
would be at the end we'd have found an
answer that could not be improved
progress would come to a screeching halt
stasis would follow
and that would be a kind of hell a
perpetual state of nothing changing
and the gradual realization that this is
it
where the only novelty will be found in
looking back to the past
to a time where it was possible for
things to actually get better but
happily
we will not reach the end there is no
end to what we shall discover
and what we will find exists tomorrow
like everything else we know
what we know to exist is perpetually
open to revision
and this allows us however slowly and
incrementally to gain control of it
and to show how its existence can help
solve our problems
and to make us all the better for having
found it